this is october of 2021.
we've just been through a period of
very public
hand wringing
regret recrimination
shallow analysis of what went wrong with
the united states of america in terms of
the defeat in afghanistan and
this came shortly after a long period of
parallel introspection
as to what had gone wrong in the
american culture of policing
i say culture of policing advisedly
because there was no sincere interest in
looking at
say the constitutional principles that
define policing the legal principles or
nor even the actual training and
education of policing this was largely
you know
reflected upon as a cultural issue that
somehow americans ought to be kind and
good and loving towards one another but
a series of scandals in terms of police
brutality and to some extent police
corruption police incompetence revealed
the extent to which culturally america
has a problem with policing now i'm
insinuating that the problem is not
merely cultural at all and i see in
terms of the recrimination and
reflection on the failure
in afghanistan
and now just this last week
the recrimination and reflection on the
apparent failure of the cia
explain a little more what i mean by
that
i see this eagerness on the part of the
american public
to leap to a sort of cultural framing
of the problem
rather than facing up to the extent to
which
uh the problems you're encountering
whether you think of them in terms of
policing in terms of the military
in terms of a unique institution like
the cia the central intelligence
instead of facing up to the extent to
which those problems are the result of
particular people who made particular
decisions at particular moments in time
and indeed particular laws particular
principles set down in writing which can
include the constitution can include law
in that most obvious sense but sometimes
it's in a somewhat more slippery form
such as a presidential directive some
written instructions um some written
mandate or definition especially for
institutions like the cia for how the
cia is is supposed to operate
now the questions we're dealing with
here i think the majority of my audience
frankly is non-american
i think it is
worth wondering
to what extent
are these problems
profoundly similar in
england
in australia
in the netherlands
in belgium in france
in germany
part of the pattern i see playing out
is
a very
deep seated assumption
that we can understand political
progress
by looking at the leading edge of
technology
and that by focusing on you know
optimistically
the extent to which the leading edge of
technology is potentially or actually
transforming our society we can then
infer from this
a tremendous transformation throughout
all other aspects of our society right
so
what do i mean well for anyone who is my
age but even more so if you were 10
years older than me 20 years old to me
30 years old to me
it's very easy to see how much
the world has changed technologically
since your own childhood
it's very easy to be optimistic about
the extent to which culture and politics
might be presumed to change to either
have already changed or to be in the
process of now profoundly uh changing
because of uh that that kind of
leading-edge progress
the work done by doctors in hospitals
the work done by um
a family doctor not in a hospital in a
doctor's office or making house calls
how much has it changed really in 50
years
it's very easy to be optimistic and have
this technology centered view of
medicine and of the role of government
in medicine and the role of the patients
in medicine like you know the actual
sick people it's very easy to look at
and think oh well you know um
we've discovered mri scanning we know of
these advanced computer forms of you
know scanning
images
that show us with this tremendous
precision exactly where the cancer is in
your body and you can make a kind of
false inference from this
that therefore the role and
responsibility of the doctor has has
changed or that it is changing or it's
about to change
you know in relation to the patient in
relation to illness in relation to the
role of government in providing money
and certain kinds of legal strictures
that define you know
medical institutions providing this this
kind of care for the public
the vast majority of what doctors do
what they need to do what they actually
do in medicine it hasn't changed
technologically and it's not going to
change what really matters for doctors
and nurses today is the same as what
mattered 50 years ago right and you can
discuss this
culturally you can't express
the underlying issues culture you can
say well what you really need is a
culture that produces caring
patient people
who deal with the same problem again and
again and again like depending on which
doctor you're talking to where you can
say look you know what what do 90 of
your cases boil down to
you know the vast majority of doctors
whether they're in an emergency room in
a hospital or they're you know a doctor
in a small town where they provide all
medical services for that small town
they are going to be able to list off
just a few conditions that they get
again and again and again they work
within a very small remit and then if
you look at what it is they're doing
again kind of five days a week what's
their normal beat and you ask them well
how much has medicine changed in this
field in the last 50 years you may be
surprised to find
you know that it hasn't changed at all
now on the other hand of course okay so
if we're talking about this culturally
medicine has changed tremendously right
culturally
right who are
doctors what kind of education do they
have what kind of
ethical and moral outlook
on the world
that's changed tremendously
all right i think we're going through a
period of time
in the united states of america
throughout the english-speaking world
i.e even australia and england and i
think throughout western europe
where we're quite reluctant to look at
these problems whether it's something as
seemingly anodyne as the problem of the
reform of healthcare like how to improve
the way medicine is practiced
um
questions of how to reform education you
know
or
you know topics that are a little bit
more menacing in their implications like
why did
western imperialism fail in afghanistan
because by the way it wasn't just the
failure of the american military
practically every you know your western
european ally of the united states of
america got some blood on their hands
got some mud in their boots with this uh
this failed project in uh in afghanistan
you know the italians were there so on
and so forth of course the british and
the canadians everyone threw in their
lot with the american uh war of it
there's a tremendous reluctance
to examine and evaluate these things in
terms of the decisions made by
particular people in positions of
executive authority now i ask you if you
have been reading the new york times as
i have i've been reading it on paper um
terrible newspaper don't subscribe don't
pay for it terrible newspaper i really
don't recommend it but if you've been
reading the new york times you might
stop and ask yourself is there any other
war in the history of the world that was
remembered this way
that was reflected on and analyzed this
way
where we look back at the events that
happened without ever once saying there
was this battle
fought at this time
with this general in charge or this
commander in charge and these were the
decisions he made i'd like to say he or
she but i think i think they're all male
still to this day but anyway these
decisions that he or she made and where
you're looking at the war battle by
battle executive decision by executive
decision right and then looking at the
outcomes that's the way we talk about
the history of the napoleonic wars right
that's the way we talk about world war
one and world war ii right it is a
history of
executive decisions
made by political leaders people like
presidents and prime ministers and
sometimes people like army generals
sometimes people like dictators that's
the way we teach and study and reflect
on war and when people ask well where
did this go wrong you know why did why
did this side lose either the war as a
whole or this battle or this chapter of
the war right we look at
particular decisions
made by particular people and then i
think if you go deeper
the next step is in plain english to
look at education
now i don't mean education in some kind
of philosophically sophisticated sense
that's difficult to explain
but even in reading about the history of
the napoleonic wars like why did
napoleon win why was the what was the
advantage napoleon's army had over other
european armies and so on a lot of it is
gets into immediately a discussion of
education you get into a discussion of
the particular uh
military colleges that produce napoleon
himself
the type of education that produced men
working in artillery in the french
military the type of training that the
french had at that time how that's
different from just one generation
earlier in the french military the
question of the moderate modernization
and democratization
of the french military how that
contrasted to earlier generations in
france how that contrasted to their
close rivals like the prussians that's
prussian with a p but also how it
contrasted to the russians within our
and the and the british even the
discussions of like the british navy at
the time what was the advantage the
british navy had of were the navies very
quickly once you move past the level of
executive decisions made by people in in
positions of power army generals
presidents prime ministers sometimes
dictators queen queens and kings then
you get into the discussion of of
education how education formed the
competence and incompetence of the men
fighting the war how education formed
the competence and incompetence of
doctors and nurses
medical staff right you see where i'm
going with this in looking back at the
year 2020 seems so long ago
we have to look at how education formed
the competence and incompetence of the
police right created the culture of
unspeakable brutality corruption and and
frankly just plain bumbling incompetence
that
the whole of the united states of
america and the whole of the world was
led to reflect on and by the way again i
have to emphasize this didn't just
happen in america um i follow french
politics
the same questions were unfolding in
france france had its own cases of
police brutality at least one of those
cases was caught on on videotape maybe
maybe one or two they mostly didn't have
have the same kind of lurid
videotape evidence but france it during
exactly the same year
it was actually engaging into a similar
kind of set of reflections on uh the
competence
and culture
of
policing in their country
my suggestion to you here is that this
kind of peculiar technological optimism
a belief in a kind of progress that is
partly unreal
and partly real but irrelevant
has led us away from a sincere
engagement with
one executive decisions made by
particular people the particular people
will be responsible for right in the
writing of history and then two a really
sincere in-depth engagement with these
these questions of education
you know
now i defy you okay the the new york
times is many many pages long every
every issue that comes out i i'm not
reading this newspaper from cover to
cover
uh
i i basically have been listening to
kind of every major news podcast not
just from the new york times but from
many other sources i've been listening
to a great deal of political radio while
i'm in the gym
doing my 200 push-ups you know
um
in all of the news coverage and
political analysis that i've heard about
the question of
why
did the united states lose the war in
afghanistan i have never once heard
the type of very simple factual analysis
that you would
presume by default to be offered whether
we're talking about napoleon world war
one or world war ii i don't think i've
heard
army generals
named would say oh yeah at this battle
this was the decision made by this army
general and this was the decision made
by george w bush and this was the
decision made by
barack obama
i don't think people are even aware of
this i don't think they're doing it as
an intentional form of propaganda right
but the war is talked about
as if it's an entirely organic cultural
phenomenon unfolding as if it's like the
popularity of yoga classes in california
right that there was no
central hierarchy or chain of command
that made the decisions right that
shaped the course
of the war and then i say the the next
step beyond this so there's this really
strange refusal
to i mean you know it cannot possibly be
that the new york times wants to glorify
george w bush it can't be that's not
their bias here i mean i don't think the
new york times is even interested in
glorifying the legacy of barack obama i
don't you know it's it's very strange
the way we've come to perceive politics
and the way in which we've become
willingly blind
to politics to the political history
unfolding in our own times that's that's
what i see as the big issue here right
and and then i say the next step beyond
talking about particular decisions
whether those are executive orders from
the president prime ministers of various
countries or or generals you know to
then go beyond that and look seriously
at who were the soldiers who were the
fighting men
doing this and in what way did their
education prepare them or fail to
prepare them
for the ultimately cultural struggle of
trying to transform afghanistan from
being the most backward the most
fundamentalist
country throughout the muslim world into
being a modern cosmopolitan democracy
right i mean it's a huge challenge
i watched a documentary recently uh
maybe two two weeks ago now some of that
i watched a documentary recently that i
had seen
uh maybe seven years or ten years
earlier about the war in afghanistan
and you know the makers of this
documentary they didn't they of course
they didn't know how the war was going
to end i think doug murray's made in
2011. some of that they didn't they
didn't see where this was going
necessarily and as with a lot of
american sentimentality it's showing the
the soldiers in what the filmmakers
think of as a flattering light it shows
them paddling around with each other and
it shows the kind of insouciance uh i'm
saying this in like a fresh
society the the the kind of reckless
silliness of youth
you know as these soldiers are paling
around on the base and so on and while i
was watching this this particular
documentary i'm noticing the patches on
their the arms of the uniform i'm
thinking
these guys they can't be special forces
this can't be
you know
the u.s
ranger corps us army ranger corps they
can't be like i'm noticing the badges
and they're all wearing badges of like
super elite special forces units they're
not
general infantry and apart from the
documentary footage they're having
one-on-one interviews these guys
and at the end after watching the
documentary i looked it up and to my
amazement these were not normal soldiers
in the general infantry these were super
elite special forces guys
and you look at that so like us army
ranger core
that is i know this because i looked it
up
that is a 61 day special training
program and it's hard to get into you
have to compete to get into this
training program okay
what do you think they learned in those
61 days to my knowledge that elite
training program
it's a hundred percent about the
physical skills
of how to use a rifle in a gunfight and
they pride themselves they claim us army
rangers if you've got that badge you are
one of the greatest most skilled most
highly trained people in the world
for um
you know for for face-to-face rifle to
rifle gun fighting for that particular
type of combat that you're you're the
best in the world well okay so these
people were highly trained i mean
everybody who was deployed in this
particular documentary in this
particular valley where the these
particular battles were unfolding
everyone was highly educated everyone
was highly trained but we can recognize
at the same time
that the education they've received was
irrelevant
totally irrelevant to the real challenge
of transforming afghanistan from being
america's greatest enemy to america's
ally transforming afghanistan from being
culturally you know the home of the
taliban to being a 21st century
cosmopolitan modern democracy the
obviously the most
the most obvious thing is they lack the
language ability they lack any ability
to speak any local language these people
obviously they lack the cultural
sophistication strategic sophistication
the the public relations element this
document most of the documentaries show
that it shows the commanding officer
sitting down and talking to
um senior leaders in the village or
villages plural guys who are basically
senior taliban representatives you know
you know them handing out candy to
people after they've just massacred
innocent women and children and stuff
and doing the kind of public relations
and you can see
you know
these guys they kind of have an attitude
towards politics
like they're a high school gym coach
like they're they're encouraging
football players on a team like that's
the way they talk
it's like dude you you
really have no idea what's what's going
on here you have no idea that you're
you're making things worse when you you
imagine you're making things better
you're making it worse for your own
soldiers for the americans you're making
it worse for the local people and you're
exacerbating this conflict instead of
actually uh resolving it and you know
what was the world's easiest war to win
became an unwinnable war how to two
factors
through particular decisions made by
particular people and positions of
authority basically the president of the
united states
and a very small number of people who
were selected by the president of the
united states and worked very closely
with president united states and made
some decisions
normally being okayed by the president
but you know we're basically talking
about
decisions made by a very small number of
people at a very elite level those
decisions were wrong they were the wrong
decisions and what everyone should be
saying i mean including the new york
times what everyone should be doing is
really examining those decisions the
strategic decisions and really examining
the legal and ultimately constitutional
structure of authority of how it is that
wars are managed the way they are in the
united states of america which is it's
ridiculous of course the way the
american empire operates you know the
role of congress the role of the senate
and the role of the executive office of
the president and then how that relates
to the joint chiefs of staff and
military there are there are many many
ways in which you can offer a kind of
systemic analysis of what's wrong and
why why in this sense the united states
lost the war afghanistan i
i have not seen
one column inch of the new york times
i've not seen any article in any
newspaper i have not heard one podcast
one radio broadcast or one television
broadcast looking at it this way right
there's a really strange
fatalism to the way politics is viewed
in our times and the same fatalism is
demonstrated when people are examining
what's wrong with the healthcare system
and what's wrong with with policing
right and then beyond that right there
is no willingness to really look at
education and the way in which education
is producing confidence and incompetence
i just want to say sorry i do see your
comments coming in in the audience guys
um
if we started from a blank sheet of
paper and we were asking ourselves okay
what kind of people
do we need
if
we're going to conquer afghanistan and
profoundly culturally transform the
place get the local people on our side
transform it from being a taliban
dominated society in which the vast
majority of people if they are not
taliban supporters
they are supporters of a traditional
fundamentalist form of islam that's
about 80 percent as extreme as the
taliban because i recognize not everyone
in afghanistan supported the taliban but
the quote-unquote moderate muslims in
afghanistan they were they were still
more extreme than say the average muslim
in iran you know like really iran is not
it was never as extremely
muslim as
afghanistan it's a tough it's tough
contrast to offer but you know before
september 11 2001 you know
the form of islam prevalent in
afghanistan was so fundamentalist and so
extreme that saudi arabia seemed liberal
by contrast iran seemed liberal by
contrast obviously places like malaysia
and indonesia okay that's your that's
your starting point what kind of
training
would you need to provide people with
what kind of education what kind of
person is going to do that job well and
here's my point here's the leg motif for
this video here's the point we'll come
back to again again all right
don't tell me in reply
that it won't be a problem because now
we've got drone strikes
don't tell me that it won't be a problem
because we've got satellite data
don't tell me that we won't repeat what
happened in the vietnam war because
we've got unmanned aerial vehicles i.e
drone bombing and satellite data and the
internet and infrared technology
people don't want to face up to the
extent to which war hasn't changed in 50
years
right people don't want to face up the
extent to which medicine hasn't changed
in 50 years and obviously i'm not
trivializing the technological
breakthroughs having mri scans just the
use of computer imaging like you know
real breakthroughs that have happened in
in medical science technology you know
it's great it's great
but actually
most of the time for most things that
really matter
the question is what kind of people are
you training to be doctors and what are
their
attitudes and what is the overall
legal and cultural framework or
structure in which they practice
medicine right like
it makes a huge difference if you have
people whose attitude is that they have
more than one hundred thousand dollars
of debt
from going to university to become a
medical doctor and they've got to make
money as fast as possible to pay off
that debt and they want to be rich like
if you live in a culture
where people go into debt to become
medical doctors and then regard the
profession of medicine as a way to
become rich as quickly as possible right
if that's your culture okay you have
problems
that cannot be solved through new
technology
through a better computer system for
x-rays or mri imaging right it cannot be
solved through the development of
better vitamin pills better
a better
pill to help with malaria i mean there
are there are you know there's
scientific progress happening in in
various fields right
the real fundamental problem you're
dealing with all the time you know
remains the same okay you know
think about the challenge the us army
was facing in afghanistan and let's
really think about the ways in which
that challenge hasn't changed since
napoleon
it hasn't changed since world war one it
hasn't changed since world war ii and
then let's think about
just how
poorly prepared
the soldiers and the people and even the
executives of the united states of
america were at all levels how it was
that the easiest war to win
in the history of the world
became an unwinnable war
for the united states of america and it
wasn't just the united states of america
italy france canada england everyone
else jumped on the bandwagon right and
all of them thinkingly or unthinkingly
reproduce the defects
of the american strategic approach to
afghanistan so we got a big problem here
guys we've got a problem that runs deep
and in my opinion it is the same
fundamental problem that makes it
impossible for us to reform medicine
health care
makes it impossible for us to reform
policing right
this is the same problem that we see in
the impossibility of reforming the
military then what i'm going to go on to
talk about here is specifically talking
about the cia
elite level international intelligence
just reading your comments
so atlanta richard asks or i assume i
interpret his name as richard in atlanta
quote when will the west take
accountability responsibility and
consequence from the machinations of
what we call democracy and its failure
to be held to a democratic standard um
anyone here old enough to remember the
year 2000
there is a documentary that is called
unprecedented
the 2000 presidential election
i'm just going to shout this out so you
guys can find it documentary film
so i saw that such a long time ago as
many many girlfriends ago
uh for me when i saw that film it was
quite boring because i already knew all
of the
political facts rehearsed in it
uh or whatever rehearsed may not be the
best word but all the political facts uh
discussed and analyzed and presented and
i was already really familiar with them
but my girlfriend who was sitting next
to me was just shocked she was just
astonished watching this i was really i
was like yeah didn't you know that what
what even what even doing that why
aren't you you know why wouldn't you
already know this stuff um
so it was quite an
quite interesting memory for me watching
that but you know so you're asking the
question um
why is there so little interest in
democracies holding themselves to
democratic standards it's not just
america
sorry and my point here in alluding to
this film
what happened
when the president united states was
elected by a fraudulent election
it was a tampered with
fraudulent illegitimate elections
specifically in the state of florida it
wasn't the whole country coast to coast
but specifically in the state of florida
right that there was jiggery pokery in
that election it was an illegitimate
election the president says what
happened
nothing nothing happened now look you
know france
the
yellow vest movement that is a really
sincere really important pro-democracy
movement within a within a democracy you
know taiwan has a bunch of interesting
examples including what's called the
sunflower movement and it went on to
other forms um sunflower movement
student movement in in taiwan there are
some little indications that some people
in democracies are interested in in
democracy
not enough i mean it's it's really you
know
obviously the whole world should be in
the grip of a massive yellow vest
movement and to use the taiwanese
example a massive sunflower movement um
you know until we have real democracy
but the vast majority of people don't
care
and from my perspective for someone in
my generation what happened in the year
2000 it's not 21 years ago oh and really
it's before that so really it's more
like 22 years ago
because the period leading up to the
election is part of the history that's
what i mean here um
[Music]
that really shows you know
how little people care about democracy
in western democratic countries that's
it's a huge problem
and um i don't think it's getting better
i think it's getting worse
uh over those over those 20 years
and i would say this also sorry i keep
alluding to what you see in the
newspapers
um what you hear on radio and in
podcasts i do i listen to the horrible
podcast made by
the new york times it's all garbage i
despise the new york times
um
do you see in those newspapers or here
on those podcasts
anyone saying
wow
what the french have happening with the
illa vest movement that's what we need
here we need people demanding direct
democracy
now you know apart from the fact that i
don't there's no uh
broad public interest there's also no
interest coming from kind of career
authors reporters and intellectuals
right there's no interest from from
elsewhere and the uh
sort of
amongst the political cognoscenti the
supposed leaders of opinion
so someone also comments um
quote i believe at least half of your
audience are americans
know really the strength of this channel
is in europe
so kind of i have to thank my audience
for putting up with the extent to which
i talk about american and canadian
politics and i'm going to be honest with
you i think the reason why this channel
is more successful in europe than in
america is because europeans have a
higher level of education you know why
do so many swedish people watch this
channel
you know swedish people and german
people and swiss people and stuff you
know
english is not easy for them like i have
people watching this with english as
their second language
and
you know sadly if you've spent some time
in america i think you would know very
very few americans are at a level of
education such that they can appreciate
the nihilistic discussions of religion
politics history
ethics that are found on this channel
so you know despite the fact that
the vast majority of my videos about
politics are talking about uniquely
political material uh no this channel is
not successful and it's not popular in
the united states america which
obviously shows most of all just in the
total number of viewers i have remaining
so low
even during periods of time when i
devoted myself to studying you know i
read and reviewed bernie sanders own
book while bernie sanders was debating
with joe biden and that was the biggest
story in the world so there's there's
very very little
uh intellectual depth to be swam in in
the american audience and that's also
why by the way my own hopes for changing
the future of the united states of
america they tend towards wanting to do
a project like making my own
james bond movie making my own batman
movie making my own star wars movie and
by the way i don't mean literally a
movie starring james bond my point is
that in terms of changing american
culture and american politics
i really look to the possibility of
engaging with pop culture with doing
something creative that communicates the
ethical and political point i want to
make indirectly
i very much doubt i would actually make
a movie starring the character james
bond but you know what i mean the point
is if you can take your message
and express it in an action film
if you can take your philosophy frankly
and make it meaningful to an audience in
that kind of
artistic and indirect way you know
that's the way i think to to influence
the future the united states of america
and that's the future of democracy in
the western world
and there's a real need for it i mean
you tell me whether you think of fiction
or non-fiction is there any movie you
can go out and watch right now that's
going to give you a really meaningful
set of reflections on what went wrong in
afghanistan
there should be ten
you know at the end at the end of the
vietnam war there was a
an avalanche of filmmaking both fiction
and non-fiction right
where you know
uh i don't think there's anything
mainstream and i think if you if you
look around at what's available in terms
of small independent filmmaking you're
looking at little crumbs there's really
nothing terribly impressive
in terms of cultural production and by
the way you know i do think
um
i do think you know it's meaningful to
have a response to what happened in
afghanistan that is as symbolic and as
indirect as
you know star wars you know what i mean
like i'm not saying everything has to be
a direct ham-fisted commentary and by
the way uh george rr martin the author
of game of thrones the author of he said
his his career very much started as
writing science fiction responses to the
war in vietnam
and i i feel even now as an old man he's
still wrestling with
what went wrong in the vietnam war you
know what what the significance of that
that period of politics is for his own
life and for the united states of
america
yes so june vogue comments this is
interesting here quote this reminds me
of the conversations we're having now in
the united kingdom about how exactly and
how well the police are vetted after a
police officer has murdered a citizen
heart examined on his on on this issue
now a second um
[Music]
you know in canada and the united states
we are burdened with a very simple
concept that england has not embraced
yet
and that is equal protection under the
law and equal benefit
that that's such a simple principle but
it's very very difficult to live up to
you know and england doesn't have that
yet i mean england doesn't have any
written constitution right there is no
standard
that anyone in the police otherwise are
held to the united kingdom i did read
about i was interested in police
brutality police corruption police
incompetence in england
and frankly it's terrifying
i mean this is you know
uh this is one of the scariest countries
to live in the world in terms of the
relation between irresponsible authority
and the white boy
um
but to quote a punk band you might have
heard of called the sex pistols
england is dreaming
so we have several people in the
audience writing in to say they were too
young to remember the year 2000 well i
encourage you guys brendan and june bug
take the time to watch that documentary
that that'll probably mean a lot to you
and i think you will have childhood
memories linked to what happened in the
year 2000
um but you know suddenly it'll start to
make sense and you'll realize the
enormous
significance of just of public
indifference to that issue i mean
there's the issue itself and then
there's public indifference to it and
again let's be clear this isn't just the
united states of america this matters in
france it matters in england it matters
german matters you know it matters in
all the connected political cultures
around the world and all those people
recognize george w bush as the
legitimately elected leader of the
president united states when he was not
you know
it wouldn't have taken a whole hell of a
lot of backbone for tony blair to stand
up and say no i do not recognize this
man as the legitimately elected
president united states he could have
morally you know could have engaged in a
moral grand standing that way and say
look america has a broken system of
elections and until you guys fix it and
you also have a corrupt
supreme court that was part of the drama
of what happened no but yeah this was in
response to a question talking about
democracies holding themselves to a
standard democracy and thus democracies
holding one another uh to a standard of
democracy
yeah we got a lot of swiss people in the
audience
he alluded to that briefly before and i
i think you know
i think this reflects that the swiss
have a high level of education
and thus there are swiss people i mean
you know english is not really anyone's
first language in switzerland but i have
a significant swiss audience
nevertheless and i do not i do not have
much of an audience in atlanta georgia
in case you haven't heard uh so on and
so forth
alexa what's the time in zurich
prime time in zurich
it's a good time for me to be
broadcasting from a swiss perspective
also
um
okay so let's talk about the cia let's
talk about uh intelligence
it's really saddening to me i guess you
could say
intelligence and the cia it has never
been my special area of study but it
intersects with and overlaps with each
and every area of study i have been
engaged with
the cia is an important part of the
history of haiti it's an important part
of the history of the sudan it's an
important part of the history of
cambodia laos vietnam you know but
pretty much anything and everything i
study the currently unfolding conflict
still in um
syria you know
almost everything i have ever studied in
politics you have to deal with the
question of what is the cia attempting
to do and then what do they actually end
up doing and what did
what did different presidents united
states direct the cia to do and then
maybe how did the cia interpret that and
carry it out because the cia has some
they're given some liberty to show some
initiative and take things in one one
direction or another
um
[Music]
we're living through a month
when i mean this this month right now
october 2021 the new york times is
engaging in public hand wringing they're
wringing their hands
over the question of whether or not the
cia has lost its edge has lost its
capacity um
whenever i read these articles or hear
these podcasts or these news broadcasts
on the radio i hear a lot of radio via
the internet as alluded to so it's a
radio program but
repackaged as a podcast whenever i hear
these sources it's really shocking and
saddening for me to see that i know much
more about the cia
what it is and what it isn't than the
people who are paid professional
journalists uh who are supposed to be
doing this job you know
um
that is very saddening for me now i'm
already accustomed to listening to the
news about cambodia and feeling that i
know and understand much more about
cambodia than the the journalists who
are presenting this you know in english
uh you know i listen to the news about
thailand about taiwan like there are
many places of the world and many kind
of categories of political reporting
where i've had to become resigned to the
fact that if i listen to this i'm going
to be kind of
heavily sighing and complaining oh god
these people don't know what they're
talking about or if i'm reading an
article in the new york times these
people don't know what they're writing
about
but yes it is especially saddening it is
especially demoralizing to see american
journalists writing in english who know
and understand so much less about the
cia about the central intelligence
agency than i do their past present and
future importance
he'll just pause again now to look at
your comments guys
yeah junebug comments that it's so
annoying when people make a lot of noise
in a protest and then forget about it
like it's nothing a short time later
well this is the end of the year 2021.
how many of the issues of 2020 does
anyone care about anymore do you
it's not so long ago you can remember
defund the police you know et cetera et
cetera you can remember these extreme
demands for political reform political
change but even going back just
one year earlier than that
it seemed like everyone in the united
states of america wanted to reform the
health care system and one to form the
university system i mean it's a long
time ago now 2018 2019 remember when
what everyone wanted to deal with was
student debt tuition the cost of health
care right like
and uh
all of these things have disappeared
things that influ that that impact
people's lives very directly and
personally and things that are far away
whether that's afghanistan or what have
you
um
so yeah the fleeting and shallow nature
of what little political engagement
exists is also
it's kind of dire warning about the
state and future of democracy and look i
can say the same about veganism i can
say the same about ecology you can say
the same about global warming
uh from one month to the next kind of
thing um these things come and go
none of them as fashions even endure as
long as blue jeans
and it's very sad to think that for
these people they care less about
democracy than they do about the latest
style in blue jeans
alexa what's the time in colorado
someone's eating their lunch in colorado
while watching this live good for you
um
so we're going through a brief period of
time when the mainstream press
is criticizing and cross-examining the
cia
why why why
for getting killed
what could be more surreal or bizarre
than that
that the cause for concern
the cause for political controversy
is that a memo went out from the cia a
memorandum saying that a lot of their
informants
are being killed
now again
the fundamental problem here
is a false model of progress based on
technological innovation
based on an examination of the leading
edge of technology and presuming that
that makes other parts of the political
cultural and educational infrastructure
obsolete and it doesn't it's irrelevant
okay
oh well now we have email now we have
satellites now we have surveillance
cameras now we have all these high-tech
innovations
guess who's joining me hey babe i'm in
the middle of live streaming yeah in
case you hadn't guessed okay
um
[Music]
naturally there's a kind of optimism
linked to this that people think they'll
change the world that people think
conventional um
intelligence work uh conventional
espionage is obsolete or can be
neglected or can be forgotten about and
just as i've said before that the most
important thing in healthcare
is not the leading edge of new
scientific developments you know what
goes on in a laboratory or some new
piece of high-tech equipment that's come
out
but rather the question is the actual
skill set the quality of the people not
just in terms of their competence and
education in that sense but the quality
of people ethically and in terms of
their motivation who are every day
delivering babies every day
um conducting pap smears every day
inspecting x-rays every day giving
people advice
that they should quit smoking
eat a vegan diet eat a healthier diet
you know and again and again and again
like you know if you're a medical doctor
the united states of america
what matters more these kinds of
technological innovations or
having the skill set to really deal with
the obesity epidemic or the skill set to
really deal with the drug addiction
epidemic right it's not high tech it's
low tech it deals with you know ethical
problems and problems of personal
motivation to a much greater extent than
what's what's happening in the leading
edge okay what is intelligence work what
does it mean to be an asset or an
informant for the cia okay
think about a hotel
where there's one guy on the janitorial
staff
nobody really likes and nobody ever
talks to
and everybody knows
that he's an alcoholic
so sometimes he disappears for a few
weeks at a time
and nobody knows why and nobody asks and
if somebody is hired new to staff say
hey wait what happened to that guy why
didn't he show up for work today people
say oh yeah that guy
don't worry about the boss as some kind
of favor to him or something the boss
keeps this old alcoholic around he gives
him a job here as a janitor but when he
doesn't show up for work we just don't
even bother complaining you know that
guy's a that guy's a no hoper
that guy
nobody pays attention to
has the key
for every single room in the hotel
and sometimes there are important guests
who stay in that hotel politically
important strategically important
and sometimes
he uses his key
to go into that room
and very carefully remove every document
in their briefcase and photograph them
all and then put them back into the
briefcase in the same order
and sometimes he takes a very small
electronic listing device
and inserts it into
that person's briefcase so that when
they go to their meeting there's a
device recording the conversation
sending it back to the cia one way or
the other okay
it's a
thankless
humble
task
and you know what
that guy nobody pays attention to
maybe once in a while he poisons
somebody
maybe once the while he kills somebody
and nobody ever knows
that is what it is to be an intelligence
asset to be
an informant
what is going to motivate this guy
and how are you going to reward this guy
you think it's money
where do you think the hotel is
that i'm describing to you right now
where this humble person is doing this
humble work
and by the way most likely the owner of
the hotel
is to some extent in on it to make this
possible you know like maybe not maybe
you've maybe you've given the hotel
owner a fake story maybe you've just
bribed the hotel owner you've taken them
aside you don't let them know it's
intelligent say look
this is my uncle charlie he's an
alcoholic we're trying to get i know
he's no good but look can we pay you to
can you keep him on staff even though
sometimes he disappears on a drinking
bench and by the way my point is here
when this guy disappears he's not going
on a drinking bench he's doing other
kinds of operations
that take him away for whatever he's
disappearing and reappearing for other
reasons
what if the hotel i'm describing to you
is in communist china
what if it's in
iran
sooner or later
this guy gets caught
sooner or later he is tortured
and then killed
that's the future he can look forward to
as an intelligence asset
for the cia what are you going to pay
him
what are you going to pay him to do that
job and how was he ever even going to
spend the money
all right he's got to live
that life he's got to keep up that
cover story
and you might say oh well
he could own a mansion somewhere else
and have his wife and kids think no no
he can't i mean the vast majority of
people doing this guy
really really you can't you know think
about the life he's got to lead whether
it goes on for five years 10 years 15
years 20 right
and we've just had this kind of strange
admission from the cia that they have a
problem because their people
are getting killed all right if you own
a mansion
there's a paper trail if you have a wife
and kid somewhere else who are being
well taken care of who are living in
luxury while you're living in poverty as
a janitor part-time janitor at a hotel
there's paper trail all right there's
there are signs for all this kind of
thing all right that's
that's the kind of person
the cia needs now i have read and i have
heard interviews with a great variety of
people who are
assets
for
the cia at different levels
you know in different capacities and for
different lengths of time
there are no interviews with the guys
who died
with the guys who disappeared
right
the untold
side of the story is this body count
that's spread out
all over the world
and
you know how much do you think
technology has changed this in 50 years
they had little miniature cameras 50
years ago they had little miniature
listening devices it was a little bit
different you know what i mean but when
you were at that level you know that
level of budget when you have a
multi-million dollar budget even 50
years ago you'd be surprised just how
good the surveillance equipment was i
mean it's become cheaper it's become
optimized and so on and so forth i know
but still the mechanics you're talking
about here right and you're talking
about
people who have to have an ethical
commitment to not switch sides to not go
over to working to the chinese and
handing you false intelligence go or
whatever the enemy state is whether the
chinese the russians the iranians
whatever right you need people who are
really sincerely committed to working
for you and for this cause and i'm not
even saying even if it kills them
they have to be doing it with the
awareness that sooner or later
eventually it's going to kill them
so we're talking about a country in 2021
that is not capable of facing up to the
kind of profound educational failure
behind the failure of their health care
system
hospitals doctors nurses etc right the
profound educational failure behind the
incompetence of their police
police services law and order
the whole legal system the court system
the lawyers everything else right
we're not capable of even thinking this
way
about the failure in afghanistan and you
know obviously it's not just afghanistan
i think if you look at the failure in
iraq it's a somewhat different failure
but you know we've several failures
connected to and overlapping with
afghanistan that we can we can hitch to
this
same
wagon
and as i've said again again parallel to
this there's a refusal to think kind of
honestly and clearly
about executive decisions because it
just leads to what concludes whose fault
is this what exactly did george w bush
decide what exactly does the
constitution say you know where exactly
did this go wrong we don't want to look
at
you know police departments and what
they do not just their training of
police officers but the actual you know
principle when do you choke someone if
you're a police officer we don't want to
look at that oh yeah that decision was
made by one man this guy on this date at
this he he signed the order for when the
police should use chokeholds that's what
it comes down to and you know sorry it
might be the state governor it might be
the mayor it might be you know
it might be a the captain of the police
the chief of police whether it's the
sheriff depending on where you are but
particular people made particular
decisions that particular consequence we
don't think that way of a politics at
all so now when we move into the
category of black ops
of things that are genuinely secret
how much worse are these same problems
right how much less capable are we of
mentating you know like just
visualizing and thinking through
the kind of competence we were supposed
to be developing how and why it is we
fell short of it right how incapable are
we of just even conceptualizing the
problem
let alone moving toward a solution so
what do i actually hear
from
the new york times you know oh these are
oh
oh well you know um
i feel like the problem is
that um the united states is falling
behind from the leading edge of spycraft
they use the word spycraft like 50 times
right they want to talk about this
as if it's the cellphone industry like
oh you know china is moving ahead in 5g
cell phone technology is it 5g we're at
now okay 4g 5g i don't know
you know oh oh is is america falling
behind in in cell phones is china taking
the lead in cell phones they're talking
in the same way that on a deep
unexamined level is technological
about china
racing ahead in spycraft about iran
racing ahead in spycraft right they
don't want to look at it educationally
they don't want to look at it at an
executive level executive decisions
being made like an actual plan or a law
or a resolution or constitution whatever
right
and they also don't want to look at it
culturally so i went to class one day at
the university of victoria and it was a
special class for trying to arrange um
an internship so it wasn't the usual
university class and right at that time
i had been looking at getting a job in
intelligence myself so i could go on a
long digression about this so that it is
actually an interesting digression i
used to
i used to bitterly joke about this
there was a time when i went around and
talked to like maybe five different
university professors like this if you
did this like on seinfeld it would seem
hilarious like living through it you're
like is my life a situation comedy i sat
down with five different professors five
very different guys all men
and said look you know this was what i
wanted to do with my career but now that
the university has proven that it's
broken i can't do that like what do you
think i should do with my my education
in criminal and all five of them told me
to work for the cia
and like you're sitting there like
you know is it me like is it something
about me is it is it is it my swag is it
my steez your response like this guy
like this and they knew me they were not
strangers these professors each of them
had some level of knowledge of an
appreciation they'd worked with me for
some time wasn't wasn't right at the
beginning like you know is it me
or do they say this to [ __ ] everybody
you know what i mean is this like their
normal go-to oh you should work for the
cia right and i just i just put in a
footnote some of them just immediately
said cia for me
but some of them said more broadly and
you know they said look you should look
at
working for the canadian military
intelligence you should look at this
intelligent where they talk through
several different
careers in intelligence and spy craft
shall we say uh with the cia just being
one of them on the spectrum but some of
them just said oh see i asked you to do
with your career
um
it was about that time this was fresh in
my mind this kind of surreal experience
and like guys i wasn't enrolled in
espionage that wasn't my major in
university you know what i mean it's not
what i signed up for guys this is what
these professors are telling me that's
what a guy with my skill set should go
into i know
well i mean
uh now that i think about it
so yeah it was it was a very strange and
saddening time in my life and you guys
know i went through signing up to fight
signing up to join the army and fight
against isis and i i did i did look at
signing up for several different armies
so i go to this one special class
connected to getting an internship
and there is a girl there from iran i'm
sorry i'm saying girl i should say young
woman
i got she was wearing the full black
smock
you know the full flowing gown of being
a orthodox muslim so i couldn't see much
of her
and her voice was so immature that
that's why i think of her as a girl not
a woman just her way of speaking
now i i don't know her age she was you
know
i can't i can't describe her aside from
the fact that she's wearing this this
smock of being an orthodox muslim i
don't know what she looks like i don't
know anything about her you know i don't
know how old she is you know but she
sounded very immature it's possible
she's 25
but is a really immature 25 and it's
possible she's 18.
you know i don't know
anyway i've been going through this and
she started talking and joking openly
kind of in front of everyone in the
classroom she wasn't speaking to me like
i'm a close personal friend or something
she started talking about the fact
that um representatives from the
government
so this is the government of canada
but they it's quite likely they were
really the american government working
hand in glove with the canadian
government it's not worth my getting
into how that happens but some
representatives of the government either
canada or the united states or both had
approached her and tried to recruit her
to be an intelligence asset in
iran
and she was talking about this in a
girlish world oh isn't this just the
limit you know like that she would be
this disgust anyway i didn't interrupt
her but i went over to her because there
for a couple hours and went over to her
some
some number of minutes later and i said
look you know i understand i understand
you're just laughing about it
but really you should never discuss that
openly this way and you should be very
careful what you say in email or
facebook messages because when you go
back to iran
the government of iran will know that
you had that meeting
they'll know like even if you think it's
a joke and you'd never do it right
they will know that you have been
contacted that you've been spoken to and
they'll know basically what you just
said in this in this room
now and
when you say that you just laughed at it
they may not believe you
this is someone who may be imprisoned
tortured and interrogated the next time
they go back to iran
and if you look at it from the
perspective of the iranian government
like you know in a perverse
machiavellian sense can you blame them
they have a problem with
iranian citizens going over and living
in western countries whether france
america canada and coming back with
political attitudes and an agenda and
attachments to intelligence agencies
and
reporting providing working as assets
and again you could become a janitor
in a hotel right it's not just
scientists in a nuclear research
facility right because the point is if
you're a janitor in a hotel
sometimes scientists from a nuclear
facility stay as a guest at that hotel
right like this is it throughout the
whole society and this is the way
intelligence work pervades
uh the whole society okay
but we're talking about ethics and
motivation and education and
culture think about how difficult it is
for the canadian government
to find a young woman like that
who is so profoundly muslim so orthodox
muslims so committed to the religion
that living here in canada she's still
wearing the full black smock which you
know like you have the right to do that
here illegally you can but very few
people do like a lot of people when they
come over here they start dressing like
a canadian they start wearing sorry i
shouldn't say like a canadian they start
dressing like a californian let's put
that away they start wearing blue jeans
and a t-shirt or whatever even if when
they go back to visit their family in
iran they then wear more conservator so
this is someone who is
so deeply committed
to islam fundamentalist extremist islam
let's put it that way that that's how
they're living their life
and you think
she is going to make a commitment
to work for the queen of england
to betray the people and government of
iran
and inform
and you know again do all the work of
intelligence she's going to do that for
you
with the knowledge that this will lead
to again
eventually her being tortured and
executed her being imprisoned tortured
and executed and quite likely her
relatives at least her relatives are
taken in and interrogated quite likely
her her brothers or what have you been
her parents other members of her family
even if they're not tortured and
executed they will at least be
imprisoned and interrogated and you know
everything
you think that
is her level of commitment to king and
country to the queen of england to
canadian
democracy the great inspiring ideal of
canadian democracy how rare would that
be to find someone who can work that way
for the cia
making the transition from canada to
america i can now say exactly the same
[ __ ] to you about chinese communism
right we have all these chinese coming
here and they come and they study our
universities
you think you can sit down with one of
those people and you can turn them
you can get them to work for the cia
when they go back to china and even if
you think you can the vast majority of
those people the minute you do it
they're gonna contact the chinese
embassy or they're gonna they're gonna
contact one of the organs of the chinese
communist party and they're gonna say
hey look you know this is what the
government of canada or the cia or the
government states wants me to do
and then they will become instantly a
double agent because the chinese
government will say okay just keep
pretending like you're cool with that
keep it go that's what sorry this is
standard melissa surprise this is
standard practice they say okay we're
going to give you some fake files you
can share with them look we're going to
give you intelligence you can share with
your cia handler or whatever the agency
you can hand up the line you know we're
going to get full we're going to keep
cultivating you as a false asset for the
caa and again it's not it's not
it's not like opening a bakery okay you
open a bakery maybe it's going to fail
and you go bankrupt maybe it's going to
be a huge success maybe something else
you are engaging in a venture that
inevitably ends with your death
and again really serious consequences
certainly in china your whole extended
family you know if you become a cia
informant or asset in communist china
what's the consequence for your parents
your brothers and sisters your children
or grandchildren if you have any
where do you think that leads to for
them all right they're on a list
forever you know and by the way i do
think i do think the communist
government of china it's less brutal
than the government of saudi arabia or
iran it is you know
um and to be fair
how do you think the government the
united states of america treats people
who come to the united states to spy for
vladimir putin and that exists and there
are for example yeah
it may be less brutal than some other
countries but there is some measure of
brutality involved in this
okay and now let's flip that scenario
around you want to talk about motivation
and ethics for people working in
intelligence
how many people are there who go from
iran
to the united states of america and are
die hard
deeply loyal to iran
and will continue reporting to iran and
serving iran for its own for the rest of
their lives
and it doesn't matter if you torture
them it doesn't
they believe
and i just when you talk about iran
we're not even really talking about
islam you're talking mostly about
nationalism there are very secular
people in iran i'm not joking there are
people who are you know kind of
nominally muslim they're just barely
they're pretty secular modern people but
they are passionate nationalists they
support iran as a nation-state going
back to you know the war with ancient
greece you know they think of it as
ancient persia all the way through their
imaginary glorious future there are
people who are iranian nationalists and
then of course in addition to that there
are muslim fundamentalists who see iran
as the you know unique bastion of the
one true form of their religion that
they want to find out you think that's
hard to find
like think about which one is scarce
and now let's think about the language
dimension
how many people are there in iran who
speak good english or speak good enough
english they can come over and do this
job here
right how many chinese people are there
who speak english speak good enough
english
in every
single case
right this game is massively stacked in
favor of the anti-american
forces
right and you can't take a white guy
and train him to speak korean
and insert him in north korea
[ __ ]
okay you can't take a white guy
from boca raton
and get him to become a janitor in a
hotel
in north korea
you have to have some way of finding
within north korea
someone who ostensibly and on the level
is a good loyal communist but who deep
down in their heart is willing to betray
north korea fighting subvert and fight
against north korea and do this for you
right ultimately at the cost of their
own life
the lives of their family
all right that's what we're talking
about here and it hasn't changed in 50
years okay and email and uh recording
telephone conversations and satellites
and you know
that's
what we're talking about and
the quote unquote failure of the cia is
not what the new york times is reporting
i just feel like these people are
completely politically illiterate they
know what they're talking about they
don't understand anything about it the
failure of the cia is not that people
are dying this has always been a game
played you know those those high stakes
the highest stakes imaginable okay
that's
more than a hundred years
that hasn't changed that's that's not
gonna change right the failure is much
more profound
okay
people
are not willing
to fight and die
for the future
of democracy
in afghanistan
white americans
are not willing
to fight and die
for the future of democracy
in afghanistan
people
born and raised in afghanistan
are not willing to fight
for future democracy i'm guessing
they think
the american empire
is a [ __ ] joke
there's a demoralizing effect
of the last 20 years of warfare there's
an extent to which institutionally
culturally and politically
america has been discredited
right
in a way that nobody wants to face up to
nobody wants to take responsibility for
nobody can even seemingly conceptualize
this as i've said in terms of particular
decisions made by particular leaders
right
in terms of the consequence of those
decisions in terms of educational change
in terms of the competence of the people
involved and then yeah more broadly
having a having a culture
you know having a culture that can
transform afghanistan into a modern
cosmopolitan democracy right having a
culture that can
change its own future change the future
of the rest of the world
um
joe biden has been asked
recently
what he's going to do about taiwan
taiwan is kind of sort of in a state of
constant war with with china and joe
biden's answer is nothing
a few months earlier
people were asking joe biden what he was
going to do about cuba
and
joe biden's answer was nothing
what if instead
joe biden said
i want you to know
my wife and i
are practicing the chinese language
every night together
we're sitting and learning chinese
and i've been talking to the ambassador
in taiwan
about finding and buying a house for me
and i am so committed
to the future of democracy in taiwan
that when my term comes to an end my
wife and i are going to retire in taiwan
when we need medical care we're going to
go to a hospital in taiwan we're going
to die of old age in that one
so if china ever invades taiwan
they will know
that
they are bombing
they are shooting at literally
the house their retirement home
of the present united states america
you know
what if he said that
let's take it up
what if when he was asked about cuba he
said let me tell you how i feel about
cuba
communism in cuba is going to be
destroyed
it's going to be replaced with democracy
and it's going to happen within my
lifetime
and i know that's a fact
because my wife and i have been
practicing spanish every night and i'm
going to buy a retirement home and when
this is over i'm going to move there and
i'm going to live there for the rest of
my life my life is going to end in a
democratic cuba where they have
elections
so so and i don't care what it takes
it's happening it's happening now
and that's going to be my legacy and my
accomplishment and that's how my own
life is going to end i'm personally
committed to it to that extent
i'm going to spend my last years
with my pants rolled up
walking in the ocean on a beach in cuba
and reading the newspaper in spanish
and everyone's going to know that
communism is never going to come back
because former president united states
there's a little island
south of turkey called cyprus
50 years nobody wants to do anything
it's a lot like cuba that way it's just
this conflict that goes on and on and on
for 50 years and never gets resolved and
nobody [ __ ] doesn't it's a lot like
taiwan that way it's a conflict that
goes on and on for 50 years all three
are islands too right
a lot of parallels there
all right and nobody wants to do
anything about it because the united
states has had the world's most phony
counterproductive alliance imaginable
with
turkey you know
now this one frankly it doesn't matter
if you're talking about the present
united states or the prime minister of
england
because it could be countries other
innocent what if what if joe biden said
look let me tell you something
this situation with the turks
conquering and occupying half down
service it's going to end it's going to
end now
because my wife and i have been studying
greek every night i'm personally
committed i'm going to retire my life is
going to end
you know i'm going to buy a house on the
north side of cyprus and i'm going to
live in the reunified democracy of
cyprus the cypriot people have their
country back in they're going to have
democracy and some
um
george w bush
had no military background
he had no sense of himself as a
potential
or actual
hero
i have been told
i don't know if this is true but i have
been told by different witnesses to
history
that when he was the governor of texas
he actually spent most of the time in
his office playing video games the video
game console set up with the tv that is
the kind of claim so people who were in
his office with him reported this
in some ways it's very believable in
some ways it's
it's hard
to believe
all right
back in the year 2001
or 2002
how would things be different today how
much different would everything be if
george w bush said look he had never
thought about learning any of these
languages before
he had never thought about this part of
the world before he never thought it
would be a part of his life
but guess what
now
he and his wife
are going to devote the rest of their
lives to afghanistan
that he's bought a house there
that he's learning the language there
and that he knows he's committed to the
democratization of afghanistan working
and lasting forever because he's going
to put his own life on the line
he's going to transform afghanistan to
such an extent that it is possible for a
white american like himself to walk down
the street and buy a newspaper
and sleep at night
right
that he personally is committed to it
the language
the history the politics the culture
that he's going to throw himself into
this 110
that he is in this small
way
going to be a hero
you call this an unwinnable war no it's
not it's the easiest war to win
in the history of the world you're up
against men on foot with rifles oh the
taliban had no air force okay
and the taliban also refused to use
chemical weapons and they didn't use
nuclear weapons it was really
unbelievably
asymmetrical warfare right
okay
you lost because of particular decisions
made by particular people right
how do you motivate how do you motivate
afghan people
to be your informants to be your spies
to work for the cia when george w bush
himself doesn't have that level of
commitment
when the american people themselves
don't have that level of commitment when
the american soldiers at all levels like
elite
brass generals commanders down to the
benefit none of them have that commit
none of them are saying they're going to
get married to an afghan woman and stay
in africa afghanistan forever they're
gonna raise their own children there
they're gonna like imagine you're
committed enough that you're gonna
whether your kids are white or black or
they're half white half african whatever
you say yeah i'm committed or i'm gonna
raise my own children growing up here
and going to school here and george w
bush says he's he's so old it would be
his grandchildren or great-grandchildren
sorry he was too old to talk about his
children but he's going to have his
descendants actually living there
actually committed to that place okay
the reason why
the cia can't win especially now
especially in this phase
of the 21st century is that okay the
supporters of xi jinping the supporters
of the communist regime
in china they believe in the future of
china
in a way that americans do not believe
in the future of america in a way that
americans do not believe in the future
of democracy
and very briefly i think that problem is
the same in france and in germany and in
belgium and in the netherlands and in
england and in australia okay
there is a commitment to the next
thousand years of china's history that
runs really deep and people are willing
to risk their own lives and do daring
things right for that
thousand-year future
and it runs so deep that even if they
personally dislike the leadership of xi
jinping you know like even if they
dislike the person who's in power right
now
that's not gonna shake them that's not
gonna turn them right in in the same way
that the fact that you personally
dislike
george w bush or you personally dislike
donald trump
that might really shake the way you feel
about democracy that might really shake
the way you feel about the future of
america and i mean that whether you are
american or swiss whether you were
american or french or english right
because those people also have to think
about how they feel about the future of
america and the future of american
democracy okay there were a lot of
people in iran again whether they are
secular or devoutly muslim and they
believe in the thousand-year future of
iran
really
for real
okay america is up against enemies and
guys you have to know russians it's not
everybody in russia
but russian nationalism
again whether christian or secular oh
yeah
there are there are russians who believe
in the thousand-year future of russia
and even if they dislike the guy who's
in charge right now like they are
looking at this on a time frame where
like hey communism came and went
vladimir putin's going to come and go
but they are really deeply committed and
it doesn't matter if they've lived in
california for 10 years and they have a
better quality of life in california
than they would have had if they stayed
in vladivostok they're aware of that but
their commitment on a deep level the
same way you have chinese agents
in america right
their commitment on a deep level is is
to serve to serve that agenda so what
really matters about the failure of the
cia that we right now in october it's
not going to last
right now in october 2021 we're having a
brief period when the newspapers and
news services are wringing their hands
over this okay
it means a lot more than people think it
does it reflects an underlying weakness
in our civilization
that cannot be solved by increasing the
budget
for the cia and it also cannot be solved
by defunding
the cia see where i'm going with this
[Laughter]
what's wrong with our police forces
cannot be solved by increasing the
budget for the police and it cannot be
solved by defunding the police what's
wrong with our health care system
broadly speaking doctors nurses
hospitals everything cannot be solved by
increasing the budget it cannot be
solved by
by decreasing the budget
we have some really hard questions to
ask ourselves
and the chinese
they think they've got the answers
we're up against enemies all around the
world
who are done
with asking those questions
and i feel we are still at the very
beginning stages of examining as we are
now sleepwalking through
the wreckage left the consequences left
over
after the end of what were called the
forever wars